# My Motivation to pursue MSc AI

In Feb 2019, I was an expert in my field. I had good 8 years of design enginnering experience in one of the largest oil and gas EPCI company. I had steady growth and vast experience in the company. I frequently worked on interesting tenders and projects which required multi-disciplinary collaboration and demanded technical leadership to complete end-to-end project. I was also the design engineer. That means I had to perform several engineering calculations to understand what type of material is suitable for the job, what kind of coating system will go, making sure that is is easily installable and so on...

It may be vital to point out though, that in my design job, I was also sufficiently frustrated with the engineering tools! Most of them were a series of Mathcad and Excel based calculations. Complex problems required Finite element analysis which was a slow grinding process of performing several sensitivity analysis to be able provide a robust and cost-effective solution. The short turn-around tenders in UK jobs do not provide luxury for spending too much time on FEA. The decisions have to be made within a matter of weeks as we also need to go out in the market to get the price for the procurement.

So what we do when we do not have enough time to perform engineering? We gold-plate it. We propose a system that is conservative and expensive due to the unknowns in the design that have not been worked out (better to be safe than sorry). Because of this, our bid becomes expensive when tendering for a subsea development project. Result? - we lose!

With all this frustration, I came across a OTC publication paper [Model-Centric Digital Subsea Pipeline Design Process and Framework](https://doi.org/10.4043/29013-MS) paper which introduced me to python application in engineering. I had never programmed before but still the paper caught my attention and I was intrigued by how a software package in python can be built by just using open-source libraries capable to performing advance engineering calculations and reporting. So then I took one of the best decisions of my life - I, with the blessings of almighty Google, started learning python. 

Fast-forward 2 months, I wrote my first python script (~30 lines) that performed hoop stress calculation based on PD-8010-2 design code. With a simple `for` loop, I was able to run over 500 sensitivity cases within a few seconds. I was very impressed (and proud) but I really enjoyed learning something new and refreshing which had an instant application. To my own surprise I enjoyed programming a lot more than I had ever expected. And even more surprising, I had talent for it!. It made my job incredibly easy, fun and efficient. After that day, I never looked the my work the same way again. 

Over the course of next few months, I spent a lot of my time going though books, online courses, youtube videos. I developed number of scripts that automate the engineering workflow. With the help of stackoverflow community, I learnt to write efficient code, started using numpy and pandas for data analysis. Matplotlib was useful for creating complex graphs for results presentation while markdown and sphinx were great tools for documentaton.

So most of the analytical calculations were sorted, but the finite element analysis was still an issue, running a `for` loop was not an option as each case took a good few hours to complete. Doing an entire parameter sweep would take months so a better way was needed. I was looking for a way so that I could define a function with a few informative data points that can capture the response surface of the entire set of parameters. The answer was machine learning and in general Artificial Intelligence.

I started where everyone starts their machine learning journey - Machine Learning (Stanford University) course by Anderw NG. With a few weeks of researching, I was convinced that if I add machine learning capabilities to my current FEA  workflow, it would be a sort of invention (surprise! it's  called surrogate modeling) but I wanted to do this properly. I realised that artificial intelligence is a complex mathematical subject if you want to dig deep. There are variety of domains and applications so I needed to have access to latest research, experts and people with similar interests. So I decided to go all-in, through a part-time master's level course which provide in-person interaction with professors. MSc in Artificial Intelligence at Univerity of Aberdeen was just that.
